AN (Military Service) Sudan [2002] UKIAT 02099 (21 June 2002)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      AN (Military Service) Sudan [2002] UKIAT 02099 (21 June 2002)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/02099.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 2099,

[2002] UKIAT 02099
[
New search
]







[
Printable RTF version
]


[
Help
]
AN (Military Service) Sudan [2002] UKIAT 02099
HX/27706/2001
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 19 April 2002
Date Determination notified: 21 June 2002
Before
Ms S M Ward ( Chairman)
Mr C Thursby
Between
AN
APPELLANT
and
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
RESPONDENT
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appellant, who is a citizen of Sudan, was given leave on 10 January 
  2002 to appeal against the determination promulgated on 11 December 2001 of an 
  Adjudicator, Miss J E Perrett, dismissing his appeal against the refusal of 
  the Respondent to grant asylum .
At the hearing before us the Appellant was 
  represented by Ms C Ganning of counsel. The Respondent was represented by Mr 
  Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.
The Appellant entered the country clandestinely and claimed asylum on 5 
  January 2001. The basis of his claim was that he did not want to serve in the 
  army because he would be sent to the south of his country to fight against 
  Christians. He was summoned to report for initial training with the Popular 
  Defence Force in July 1998 but left Sudan in April 1999 and went to Syria. He 
  left Syria at the end of 2000 and travelled overland to the United Kingdom. 
  The Respondent dismissed the Appellant's claim on the basis that, in practice, 
  army deserters and military service draft evaders are re-drafted into the army 
  and the Appellant would not be at risk on return of persecution. In dismissing 
  the appeal, the Adjudicator noted certain discrepancies in the accounts given 
  by the Appellant but found that the Appellant had received call-up papers to 
  serve in the army and had fled to Syria. She concluded, however, that it was 
  not necessarily the case that he would be prosecuted for draft evasion. Even 
  if he were, she concluded that there was nothing in the background information 
  to suggest that imprisonment would amount to persecution.
Ms Ganning submitted that the evidence showed what the penalty was for 
  draft evasion in Sudan. It was a fine and a sentence of imprisonment up to 
  three years. The background evidence also showed that prison conditions in 
  Sudan were harsh and life threatening. The Appellant had evaded his call-up 
  and was therefore at risk of being imprisoned and subject to life threatening 
  prison conditions. She referred us to relevant section of the Home Office CIPU 
  Report on Sudan in the Appellant's bundle and to the US State Department 
  Report of 2000 on human rights practices in Sudan. The Tribunal's attention 
  was also drawn to the UNHCR message of February 2002 contained in the 
  Appellant's bundle where it was stated that an administrative decree in Sudan 
  of February 1993 authorised the arrest of all returning Sudanese who left the 
  country after the June 1989 coup and who had been away for more than a year. 
  The Appellant, she submitted, fell into this category. The report goes on to 
  state that such individuals are subject to investigations and the necessary 
  security measures. Ms Ganning also sought leave to tender a copy of a UN 
  regional information network published on the internet and dated 11 February 
  2001. Leave was granted by the Tribunal on the basis that the Appellant's 
  representatives had only recently obtained such report on 18 April 2002. The 
  report claimed that a major humanitarian crisis was unfolding in the south of 
  the Sudan with a massive upsurge in the war. In such circumstances, she 
  submitted, it was even more likely that the Appellant would be picked up at 
  the airport on his return to Sudan.
Mr Saunders submitted that the Appellant was not a conscientious 
  objector. At best he was a partial objector and it had been held by the Court 
  of Appeal in
Sepet and Bulbul
that partial conscientious objectors 
  could not benefit from the Refugee Convention. As regards the Human Rights 
  Convention the Appellant would have to show a real risk of penalty amounting 
  to an infringement of his rights. There was nothing in the US State Department 
  Report to show what happened to draft evaders, and on the basis of the CIPU 
  Report, the Appellant could not show that his rights would be infringed. Mr 
  Saunders pointed to paragraph 5.68 of the CIPU report where it was stated that 
  there were other options for those drafted for military service. It was not 
  necessarily the case that a person answering his call-up would have to serve 
  in the army. There was a dearth of evidence regarding what actual penalties 
  are imposed, if any. As regards the UNHCR report about the checking of those 
  returning, it was not possible to know from the evidence what the security 
  measures were or how extensive the checking process might be.
In reviewing the decision of the Adjudicator we have concluded that, 
  although she made reference in paragraph 15 to the lower standard of proof, 
  she did not put that into practice in critical areas of her determination, nor 
  focus on the correct questions with regard to the return of the Appellant to 
  Sudan. For example , in paragraph 25 the Adjudicator stated :
"Even accepting that he is at last found, it is not necessarily 
    the case he would be prosecuted for draft evasion and subject to 
    imprisonment. It is common for young men to try and avoid the service by 
    studying abroad."
Whilst it might be correct to state that the Appellant would not 
  necessarily be prosecuted and imprisoned, in the light of her conclusion in 
  paragraph 23 that there would be enquiries on his return as to whether he had 
  had the necessary exit visa, the Adjudicator should have assessed whether 
  there was a real risk that he would be prosecuted or detained.
In paragraph 26 the Adjudicator appears to have considered what 
  alternatives to prosecution and imprisonment might await the Appellant, but 
  she has not set out any conclusion on the proper question – was there a real 
  risk that he might be prosecuted and imprisoned?
Furthermore, in paragraph 30 the Adjudicator has concluded that, 
  notwithstanding that prison conditions are poor in Sudan, the Appellant had 
  not shown a real risk of an article 3 or 5 contravention. In reaching this 
  conclusion, the Adjudicator again did not ask herself the right question. The 
  evidence was that prison conditions in Sudan are harsh and life threatening. 
  In the light of that evidence it was necessary for the Adjudicator to ask 
  herself whether there was a real risk that the Appellant would be subject to 
  imprisonment and, if so, whether the conditions in prison in Sudan reached the 
  necessary threshold of severity to constitute inhuman or degrading treatment 
  for this Appellant.
Although we have concluded that the Adjudicator addressed these issues 
  incorrectly, they are matters which we may properly deal with in this appeal. 
  Firstly we deal with that part of the Appellant's claim which relates to the 
  Refugee Convention.
In the cases of
Sepet and Bulbul
[2001] Imm A R 452
, to which Mr 
  Saunders referred, the Court of Appeal considered appeals involving refusal by 
  those appellants to do military service in their home country of Turkey. The 
  Court of Appeal repeated what has become settled law that there are 
  circumstances in which a conscientious objector may rightly claim that the 
  punishment for draft evasion would amount to persecution – where the military 
  service to which he is called involves acts with which he may be associated 
  which are contrary to the basic rules of human conduct; where the conditions 
  of military service are themselves so harsh as to amount to persecution on the 
  facts; where the punishment in question is disproportionately harsh or severe. 
  However even that persecution, according to the Court of Appeal, will only 
  entitle an applicant to claim international protection if there is a relevant 
  Convention reason connected to the treatment feared by that applicant.
The Appellant stated at the hearing that he did not object to military 
  service as such but he did not want to fight the Nuba. At best he is a partial 
  objector. But whether he be an absolute objector or a partial one, he cannot 
  pray in aid the Refugee Convention unless he is able to show that he faces 
  treatment amounting to persecution for a Convention reason.
His claim is that, as a draft evader, he faces a 
  real risk of being detained at the airport and found to have evaded the draft. 
  He says that he will be at risk of a fine and up to three years imprisonment 
  in harsh and life threatening conditions. However, what he has been unable to 
  show both before the Adjudicator and this Tribunal is that he would face such 
  treatment for a Convention reason – that is, on account of race, religion, 
  nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The 
  evidence at paragraph 5.74 of the CIPU Report is that recruits are drawn from 
  the Christian minority in the south of Sudan and those living in the north, as 
  well as the Arab majority population in the north. Whilst there is evidence 
  that Christian recruits are often humiliated on account of their religion and 
  are put under pressure to convert to Islam, there is no evidence that any 
  particular religious, ethnic or racial group faces any harsher punishment than 
  any other group in the event of draft evasion or desertion. Neither is there 
  any evidence to suggest that draft evasion or refusal to serve one's national 
  service is regarded as an expression of any political belief. On the contrary 
  the evidence suggests that failure to report for military service is treated 
  relatively leniently. At paragraph 5.73 of the CIPU Report it is stated that 
  those who fail to report after having received their call papers will have 
  their pay withheld at work. If they still fail to report, they will be 
  dismissed from their job. The evidence also shows that it is possible to buy 
  one's way out of military service. The Appellant has been unable to show that 
  any penalty which might be imposed upon him for draft evasion or refusal to do 
  his national service would have the necessary connection to a Convention 
  reason. Draft evasion or refusal to serve, per se, is not a Convention reason
There is evidence in the UNHCR report at page 50 of the Appellant's 
  bundle that returning Sudanese who left after the June 1989 coup and have been 
  away for a year are subject to investigations and necessary security measures 
  pursuant to a decree of 1993. Returning asylum seekers are known to have been 
  questioned at point of entry on the basis of this decree. However we note that 
  the Appellant did not leave straight after the June 1989 coup but in 1999, ten 
  years later. There is no risk that his departure date would give rise to 
  suspicion of being a participant in such a coup or give rise to a real risk 
  that his failure to report for national service was somehow connected with 
  that coup. He has, however, been away for more than a year and thus may be at 
  risk of questioning on his return. We have considered whether the length of 
  time outside the country might give rise to a risk for this Appellant of ill 
  treatment on his return for suspected or imputed political reasons. The UNHCR 
  report suggests to us that the security measures referred to were aimed at 
  detecting those who fled after the coup, although we accept that the decree 
  may have been used to detect political opponents or supporters of political 
  opponents. But, even if this Appellant's absence abroad were to render him at 
  risk of questioning for imputed political belief, there is no evidence to show 
  what the nature and extent of the questioning and security measures which 
  await anybody detained in this way. The only available evidence about what 
  might happen is the statement in the UNHCR document ( page 51 of the 
  appellant's bundle) that UNHCR is aware of some individuals who have been 
  subjected to detention without trial. The length and nature of that detention 
  is uncertain. It cannot therefore be shown that such a risk, if it were to be 
  a risk for this Appellant, is one of treatment amounting to persecution.
We now turn to the question of whether there is a real risk of a breach 
  of Article 3 of the Convention if he were to be removed. This requires us to 
  consider whether there is a real risk that this Appellant will be apprehended 
  on his return, be imprisoned in Sudan and subject to inhuman and degrading 
  treatment.
As regards the risk of apprehension, we conclude that the evidence is 
  not such as to show a real risk. There is a dearth of evidence on this 
  subject. Ms Ganning has not been able to show us any evidence of the extent to 
  which administrative procedures and records may be available at points of 
  entry in the Sudan to enable the authorities to identify the Appellant on his 
  return as a person who has failed to answer his call-up. She submitted, 
  however, that Khartoum is a sophisticated capital and it was likely that such 
  security checks would exist. We do not accept this submission. We cannot make 
  such an assumption in the absence of any supporting evidence to indicate the 
  nature of extent of security measures in place in Khartoum airport. We are 
  unable to conclude that there is a real risk that the security measures in 
  place at Khartoum Airport are such as to pose a real risk to the Appellant of 
  being identified as a person who has not answered his call-up papers over 
  three years ago.
However, even the Appellant were to be detected as 
  a draft evader on his return to Sudan, the evidence to which we have referred 
  above with regard to the consequences for those who fail to report for 
  military service after receiving their call-up papers, indicates to us that a 
  comparatively lenient approach is taken to those who have not answered their 
  call-up papers. Failure to report in this way does not result, at least in the 
  first instance, in arrest and detention. Deserters from the army, on being 
  arrested, will usually be re-conscripted into the armed forces. This suggests 
  to us that, even for the offence of desertion, the authorities are more 
  interested in getting the deserter into the army than imprisoning him. 
  Additionally, evasion of military service is not uncommon, and at paragraph 
  5.74 it is stated it is possible to buy one's way out of military service.
Mr Saunders submitted that a conscript can be required to do his 
  national service in other ways than service in the army. He pointed to 
  paragraph 5.68 of the CIPU report to show that alternatives exist – the police 
  force, the Public Order Police, the other security forces, government 
  departments and public projects for social and economic development. The 
  Appellant does not object to national service per se and, Mr Saunders 
  submitted, is only a partial objector. Mr Saunders point, it seemed to us, is 
  that this Appellant might not find himself in the situation of having to 
  refuse to serve if picked up on his return and re-conscripted, and therefore 
  might not be faced with any penalty for refusal to serve. Whilst that is 
  possible, we note that conscripts have no choice as to what kind of service 
  they do. In the light of the recent escalation in the conflict in Sudan and 
  the absence of such choice for the Appellant, we have concluded that that 
  there is a real risk that a person conscripted now or detected as a draft 
  evader would be required to join the military.
However, even if the Appellant were to be identified on his return as a 
  person who failed to answer his call-up papers, and were to find himself in 
  the position of refusing to serve in the military, there is no evidence to 
  show that the prescribed penalty of a fine and imprisonment is nowadays 
  imposed upon persons in his position, or, if so, what level of fine and term 
  of imprisonment are normally imposed. Evidence that a particular punishment is 
  prescribed by law should be accompanied by evidence to show that there is a 
  real risk that such penalty would be imposed upon the particular appellant. 
  There is no such evidence in this appeal. In the light of this, the limited 
  evidence that prison conditions in Sudan are harsh and overcrowded, and that a 
  penalty of a fine and imprisonment of up to three years for refusal to do 
  military service is prescribed, do not, in our view, constitute substantial 
  grounds for believing that there is a real risk that this Appellant will 
  suffer torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on his return. 
  An appellant must show a real risk of breach of his Article 3 rights, not a 
  theoretical one. This Appellant has not done so.
The Appellant might be questioned at Khartoum Airport, not as a draft 
  evader but as a person who has been away from the country for some time, under 
  the Decree we have already referred to. But as we have already set out above, 
  there is insufficient evidence about what might happen thereafter.
The Adjudicator fell into error along the way to her conclusion that 
  this appeal should be dismissed . However, having examined the relevant issues 
  ourselves we have reached the same conclusion, albeit by a different route.
This appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
Ms S M Ward
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/02099.html