T (Risk UDPS) Democratic Republic of Congo [2002] UKIAT 02206 (27 June 2002)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      T (Risk UDPS) Democratic Republic of Congo [2002] UKIAT 02206 (27 June 2002)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/02206.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 2206,

[2002] UKIAT 02206
[
New search
]







[
Printable RTF version
]


[
Help
]
T (Risk UDPS) Democratic Republic of Congo [2002] UKIAT 
  02206
HX36805-2001
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 3 May 2002
Date Determination notified: 27 June 02
Before
Mrs J A J C Gleeson (Chairman)
Mr A G Jeevanjee
Mr R Baines JP
Between
T
APPELLANT
and
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
RESPONDENT
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1. The appellant, Mr Kibula Tengwa, is a citizen of the Democratic Republic 
  of the Congo. He appeals with leave from the determination of an Adjudicator 
  (Miss S Jhirad) who dismissed his appeal against refusal of asylum and the 
  setting of removal directions.
2. At the Tribunal hearing, Mr T Hodson of Counsel represented the 
  appellant. Mr A Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the 
  Respondent.
3. Leave to appeal was granted on all grounds, though the chairman who 
  granted leave to appeal indicated that ground 6 was less likely to succeed. He 
  considered that the discrepancies set out in paragraph 9 of the determination 
  might not be determinative, being only minor discrepancies about dates; that 
  the Adjudicator had not made it clear in paragraph 10 whether she considered 
  that the appellant had been imprisoned for his political beliefs or not, and 
  whether he was likely to resume his political activities on return; and she 
  failed to consider his account against the background evidence for the 
  Democratic Republic of the Congo.
4. At the hearing, Mr Hodson indicated that he would not be relying on 
  ground 6. He asked the Tribunal to consider paragraph 10 of the Adjudicator's 
  determination –
"10. I find there is a reasonable likelihood that the appellant 
    was a member of the UDPS, but not that he was a prominent member, and that 
    his low-level activities for the UDPS would not have attracted any adverse 
    attention by the authorities. No charges were brought against the appellant 
    as a result of his detention and accordingly I find there is no reasonable 
    likelihood he has a criminal record or that he is in a wanted list so as to 
    bring him to the attention of the DRC authorities.
The appellant has been absent from the country for at least four 
    years and I find there is no reasonable likelihood that he would be sought 
    or identified as a high-profile activist if he returned to the DRC so as to 
    attract persecution.
Furthermore, since his departure from the country, there have 
    been significant changes in the country situation, the AFDL is now in power, 
    and the régime from which he claimed he fled persecution no longer 
  subsists.
Although public political activity is banned, political parties 
    are allowed to exist, the UDPS continues to function and its viewpoint is 
    expressed in the press."
5. Mr Hodson submitted that paragraph 10, which contained all the findings 
  of fact and background evidence, was insufficiently reasoned. It appeared to 
  accept that the appellant was a low-level UDPS member and had been detained. 
  The adjudicator's reasoning supporting her findings of past and future risk 
  was too sparse. It was not clear on what basis the Adjudicator concluded as 
  she set out in paragraph 10.
6. Mr Hodson referred the Tribunal to the Report of the UN Special 
  Rapporteur on human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr Roberto 
  Garreton of Chile, laid before the UN General Assembly on 31 August 2001. At 
  paragraphs 59 to 63, which appear on p 65 of the appellant's bundle, the 
  Report says this –
"
Right to liberty of person
59. Many civilians and soldiers from Kivu and Equateur have been 
    detained, for reasons that are not always explained, as have journalists and 
    human rights defenders. The international commission to investigate 
    President Kabila's assassination and the Military Court commit the greatest 
    number of abuses. Although some detention centres were closed down on the 
    day of the Special Rapporteur's arrival in March, many are used 
    sporadically, for instance, the DEMIAP centre where Ngbutene died as a 
    result of torture.
60. The President declared an amnesty in May, just before the 
    arrival of the Security Council mission, which benefited many people not 
    implicated in violent crimes or treason, a crime of which dissidents were 
    often accused during the Laurent Kabila era (but not under his son and 
    successor). On the occasion of each visit by the Special Rapporteur, 
    detainees were released.
Right to freedom of movement
61. Many people cannot travel abroad and no-one may travel to 
    the east of the country. Several members of the opposition are on a list of 
    persons forbidden to leave the country, and many people have their passports 
    taken away from them upon their arrival. The Special Rapporteur found out 
    that the explanation given by the Minister of the Interior ('the passport 
    belongs to the State, it is taken away upon return and must be requested 
    each time we want to travel') is not true.
Right to physical integrity
62. Torture is still used, although in recent months the number 
    of complaints has diminished. The most serious case is that of Pierre 
    Ngbutene.
Right to freedom of expression and opinion
63. In contrast to the situation in territory controlled by RCD 
    and FLC, in Government-controlled territory, there are many daily 
    newspapers. However, criticism is always difficult, as media directors and 
    journalists are very often detained, summonsed, interrogated and sometimes 
    tortured."
7. Mr Hodson accepted that the Special Rapporteur was referring to people 
  whose profile was much higher than that of the appellant, who was neither a 
  journalist nor a media director, but the excerpt showed that the current 
  régime was still prone to detain its critics without charge or lawful 
  reason.
8. He asked the Tribunal to look at the Amnesty International Report at p74 
  of the bundle, which he contended was evidence that those who were politically 
  engaged might be detained, ill-treated and tortured. The Tribunal asked if any 
  evidence had been put before the Adjudicator to show that the appellant was 
  still politically active. Mr Hodson conceded that it had not been raised, 
  either orally or in any of the appellant's statements, but said that the 
  appellant might perhaps resume his studies. To the lower standard appropriate 
  for Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 and European 
  Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950, that remains a 
  matter which the appellant must prove.
9. Mr Hodson argued that the Adjudicator had not explained in her 
  determination whether she was satisfied that the appellant had organised 
  student demonstrations as alleged. There was no consideration of the 
  likelihood of political activity on return, and possibly no consideration of 
  whether it had occurred in the past. The determination was seriously, if not 
  fatally flawed by this omission. Given the major lacunae in her determination, 
  the Tribunal must either remit or rehear the appeal.
10. Mr Hodson said that he had not been present at the hearing of the 
  appeal. He argued that the determination ignored the test on resumption of 
  political activities set out in
Monga Mola Sokoto v SSHD
[00TH02367]
. He took us to paragraphs 19 to 23 of that decision of the 
  Immigration Appeals Tribunal of which paragraphs 22 and 23 summarise the 
  Tribunal's decision on future persecution in the Democratic Republic of the 
  Congo (in August 2000) –
"22. So the issue is not whether the appellant having engaged in 
    political activity against the Mobutu régime is because of that liable to 
    persecution – we have no clear evidence that that of itself would lead to 
    persecutory actions. There is, however, considerable evidence that engaging 
    in political activity such as the activity in which the appellant did engage 
    would lead to a risk of such treatment. We have cited statements (including 
    that of the Home Office) that members of political parties are subject to 
    harassment and imprisonment by security forces and there is ample evidence 
    that once imprisoned the treatment received would be persecutory. We see the 
    engaging in such political activity as a fundamental right and freedom the 
    breach of which may be persecution depending on the nature of the breach and 
    the treatment meted out.
23. On the evidence before us, we are of the view that if the 
    appellant were to engage in the activity protected by the Convention (i.e. 
    expression of public opinion) there would be serious possibility of 
    persecution. We do not accept… either that his political activities were too 
    low for him to claim protection or that the case turns on the knowledge that 
    the authorities might have of his previous activities. In our view these two 
    contents do not go to the central point which is whether there was a risk of 
    persecution for engaging in a Convention right."
11. That decision predates the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 
  1998. It is an unstarred decision of the Immigration Appeals Tribunal and is 
  of persuasive, rather than binding force.
12. Mr Hodson submitted that the Amnesty International Report on the 
  Democratic Republic of the Congo dated 8 January 2002 demonstrated that 
  conditions had not significantly changed, and that treatment of political 
  opponents remained harsh. Counsel referred the Tribunal to the Court of Appeal 
  decision in
Demirkaya v Secretary of State
[1999] Imm AR 498
at 
  p.506
where Lord Justice Stuart-Smith held that –
"In my judgment, if it is the opinion of the Tribunal that there 
    has been such a significant change that the appellant is no longer at risk, 
    it is incumbent upon them to explain why this is so. In the absence of such 
    explanation and reasoning, it seems to me that there may be a real risk that 
    someone who, because of his suspected association with the PKK, was 
    subjected to such appalling treatment before he fled the country, will 
    suffer more than transient ill-treatment on arrival at the airport and in 
    the day or so thereafter that he is detained. Accordingly I have come to the 
    decision that the Tribunal's determination cannot be sustained."
13. He argued that the same approach applied to the Adjudicator's 
  determination, and the Tribunal notes that this approach was followed by the 
  Court of Appeal in
Klodiana Kacaj v SSHD
[2001] INLR 354
*.
14. Mr Sheikh for the Respondent argued that paragraphs 9 – 11 of the 
  Adjudicator's determination evaluated the evidence. The appellant was aware of 
  the Secretary of State's reservations as set out at paragraphs 9 and 10 of the 
  letter of refusal, but had not provided any evidence to rebut the 
  discrepancies therein set out. He accepted that the determination could have 
  been more thorough, but contended that it was not fatally flawed as it stood. 
  There were clear findings as to the appellant's length of absence from the 
  Democratic Republic of the Congo, and at paragraph 11 had addressed the 
  question of risk on return.
15. The appellant was now 31 and the UDPS was not a student party. He 
  referred the Tribunal to paragraphs 5.5-5.8 of the CIPU Country Report for 
  October 2001 on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The UDPS is not banned, 
  but public gatherings do need a permit. Although there was no risk to the 
  appellant in the United Kingdom, he had not continued his political activities 
  here, and there was no evidence that he had been charged, so it was unlikely 
  that the appellant would now be of interest to the authorities in the 
  Democratic Republic of the Congo.
16. It was not reasonably likely that the appellant would resume his 
  political activities on return, and even if he did, as long as he abided by 
  the law and ensured that the meetings which he attended had permits, he would 
  not be at risk. Paragraph 98 of the UN Human Rights Report on the Democratic 
  Republic of the Congo (p71 of the appellant's bundle) indicated an improvement 
  in the situation, and greater freedom for political parties after the 
  accession of President Joseph Kabila. At p74, an Amnesty International press 
  excerpt reported the December 2001 the detention of a group of UDPS supporters 
  who had been planning a public meeting. Mr Sheikh suggested that the meeting 
  might have been intended as an unlicensed demonstration, and that mere UDPS 
  membership would not be enough to attract a risk on return.
17. United Kingdom or western democratic standards should not be applied to 
  the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The situation had been liberalised to 
  some extent and there was no real risk if the appellant were to be returned 
  today. He asked that both limbs of the appeal be dismissed.
18. In reply, Mr Hodson reminded the Tribunal of the inadequacy of the 
  Adjudicator's credibility finding, which was based upon peripheral matters 
  such as differences in dates, length of detention and the circumstances of the 
  appellant's escape. He had omitted to mention the beatings at interview 
  because he was not asked. The discrepancies between the various statements did 
  not on inspection go to the heart of the appellant's claim. The adverse 
  credibility finding was unsound, and the Adjudicator's determination simply 
  unclear.
19. On the question of the appellant's present commitment to the UDPS, the 
  Tribunal should remember that he had been removed from the context, and had 
  been deeply politically committed whilst in the Democratic Republic of the 
  Congo. There was no evidence that commitment had evaporated, and the 
  appellant's present lack of activity should be weighed with the general 
  assessment of his claim.
20. We reserved our determination for postal delivery, which we now give. 
  We do find the Adjudicator's credibility finding and findings of fact to be 
  unsatisfactory.
21. Mr Hodson asked that the Tribunal remit the appeal for hearing afresh. 
  The Tribunal considered whether we should remit or should dispose of the 
  appellant's appeal ourselves. We reminded ourselves of the provisions of the 
  Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000, paragraph 23 –
"23.
Unless it considers -
(a) that it is necessary 
    in the interests of justice, and
(b) that it would save time and avoid 
    expense
to remit the case to the same or another adjudicator for 
    determination by him in accordance with any directions given to him by the 
    Tribunal, the Tribunal shall determine the appeal itself."
22. Given the very substantial changes in the Democratic Republic of the 
  Congo in the last seven years, the appellant's low-level activities, and 
  particularly in the light of his educational and political inactivity since 
  coming to the United Kingdom, we did not consider either that it was necessary 
  in the interests of justice or that it would save time and avoid expense to 
  have the appeal heard afresh by another Adjudicator.
23. We therefore considered whether, if the appellant's account were 
  treated as broadly credible, it could now establish a well-founded fear of 
  persecution for a Refugee Convention reason in the Democratic Republic of the 
  Congo, or engage the European Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental 
  Freedoms 1950.
24. The detention the appellant claimed to have suffered was during the 
  closing months of the Mobutu régime, and he was released in April 1997. He was 
  not charged, so there would be no record of his activities now, and there is 
  no indication that anyone has been looking for him. The appellant has not kept 
  up contact with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, although he had a wife 
  and child there.
25. In May 1997, Mobutu's Government fell and was replaced by that of 
  President Laurent-Désire Kabila. The appellant did not return to the 
  Democratic Republic of the Congo after either of the changes of régime.
26. The current CIPU Country Report for the Democratic Republic of the 
  Congo summarises recent developments –
"On 16 January [2001], President Laurent Kabila was assassinated 
    in Kinshasa. He was given a full state funeral. His son - Joseph Kabila - 
    was sworn in as the new President of the DRC.
In February, representatives from the six warring countries and 
    the three main rebel groups attended a United Nations Security Council 
    meeting in New York on the DRC in February 2001. In a resolution negotiated 
    with all the parties, the Security Council demanded that rebel forces 
    withdraw an initial 15 km from their current positions by 15 March 2001 and 
    plan for a complete withdrawal by 15 May 2001.
In May, the Commission of Enquiry into the assassination of 
    Laurent Kabila produced its findings in a report which accuses both the 
    Ugandan and Rwandan Governments and the rebel RCD rebel group of plotting 
    the assassination and a coup.
Also in May, a law is passed allowing registered political 
    parties to engage in political activity legally subject to certain 
    conditions.
In October, the Government, opposition political parties, armed 
    groups and members of civil society met in Addis Ababa to start the 
    Inter-Congolese Dialogue (ICD). The aim of the ICD is to resolve the 
    conflict between rebel forces and the Government and to agree the setting up 
    of an interim government until free democratic elections are held. The DRC 
    Government pulled out of the talks which were subsequently re-scheduled to 
    take place in South Africa.
In February [2002], the Inter-Congolese Dialogue starts again in 
    Sun City in South Africa.
27. This appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 1997. On his own 
  account, he was a student leader in the UDPS in 1995, but has not been 
  politically active, nor studied, in the five years since coming to the United 
  Kingdom. The UDPS is a registered political party in the Democratic Republic 
  of the Congo.
28. The appellant has never sought to argue below or in his statements or 
  interviews that he would continue his political activities on return, and we 
  can therefore find no reason why a brief interest in what is now a legal 
  political party in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a young man, seven 
  years ago, should put him at risk on return.
29. We therefore dismiss the appeal.
J A J C Gleeson
Vice-President
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/02206.html