AB (Persecution, CIO) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 03598 (09 August 2002)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      AB (Persecution, CIO) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 03598 (09 August 2002)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/03598.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 3598,

[2002] UKIAT 03598
[
New search
]







[
Printable RTF version
]


[
Help
]
AB (Persecution-CIO) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 03598
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 26 July 2002
Date Determination notified: 09 August 2002
Before
Mr M W Rapinet (Chairman)
Mr D R Bremmer
Mrs E Hurst, JP
Between
AB
APPELLANT
and
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
RESPONDENT
For the appellant: Mr P. Haywood, Hackney Community Law 
Centre
For the respondent: Mr D. Buckley, Home Office Presenting 
  Officer
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The appellant in this case is a citizen of Zimbabwe. 
  He appeals by leave of the Tribunal against the determination of an 
  Adjudicator (Mr M. Renton) dismissing his appeal against the respondent's 
  decision to refuse leave to enter and asylum. Leave to appeal to the Tribunal 
  was originally refused in May last year and following an application to the 
  Administration Court it was granted on 14 June this year. The grounds of 
  appeal are in the bundle before us and are also emphasised in a helpful 
  skeleton argument put forward by Mr Haywood which we have clearly considered.
The basis of the appellant's claim is that he was an 
  active and indeed prominent member of the Liberty Party in Zimbabwe. He claims 
  to have been the head of the youth wing in the Bulawayo branch of that party.
The Adjudicator in his determination has accepted 
  the whole basis of the appellant's clam save with regard to one material 
  aspect. That is that the appellant had been arrested in June 2000 and taken to 
  the ZANU-PF headquarters where he was maltreated and detained for two nights. 
  He was the following November informed by the CIO by telephone that they 
  wished him to attend at their offices in order to be questioned about a 
  robbery. It was at this point that the appellant decided to leave the country 
  and he obtained a passport in December of that year, leaving the country in 
  March the following year.
The Adjudicator has rejected the appellant's claim 
  that the interest in him shown by the CIO in November 2000 was not the 
  ostensible reason given by the CIO, namely a robbery, but in fact was for 
  political reasons linked to his position in the Liberty Party and possibly to 
  his earlier detention.
Mr Haywood has argued that the Adjudicator's 
  findings with regard to that aspect of the appellant's claim are flawed 
  because they ignore the relative objective evidence which was that the ZANU-PF 
  and CIO, the security wing of the party, had a record of exacting revenge upon 
  those who were perceived to be opposed to them, and in particular those who 
  had opposed them during the 2000 election. He referred us to a certain amount 
  of the background evidence in support of his claim, and he also, in paragraph 
  26 of his skeleton argument, brought our attention helpfully to a very recent 
  letter from the UNHCR (dated 13 June this year) in which it is stated that:
'The situation on the ground in Zimbabwe has not substantially 
      changed and that real or perceived members and supporters of the MDC or 
      any other opposition party or movement continue to be the target of human 
      rights violations, including ill-treatment, torture arbitrary arrest and 
      detention.'
Mr Haywood then moved on to submit that, 
  notwithstanding the Adjudicator's findings in respect of the interest in the 
  appellant by the CIO, given that report of the UNHCR and given the other 
  objective evidence contained in his not insubstantial bundle of documents, 
  there was in any event a substantial risk of a reasonable likelihood of 
  persecution were the appellant to be returned.
Mr Buckley in his submissions points out that the 
  appellant, notwithstanding the CIO interest in him, was able to obtain a 
  passport after that interest had been manifested, and was able to leave the 
  country subsequently without any problem, nor it would appear, with the 
  assistance of any agents. This, in Mr Buckley's submission, indicated quite 
  clearly that the authorities had no real interest in this particular 
  appellant. Mr Buckley also points out that there is no explanation for the 
  fact that the CIO appeared to take an interest in the appellant for a 
  considerable period after his original detention by the ZANU-FP. Mr Buckley 
  emphasised the fact that the Liberty Party is a very minor party with no 
  significant influence in Zimbabwe, and that although he had extensively 
  considered Mr Haywood's bundle of documents, he had not been able to find any 
  evidence that members of the Liberty Party per se were being persecuted.
In his final submission Mr Haywood drew our 
  attention to the Tribunal determination in the case of
MM
(01/TH/00994), in particular paragraph 4 of that determination in which the 
  President, dealing with the question of persons being able to leave the 
  country on their own passports and without any problem states:
'With respect to the author, that surely is nothing to the 
      point. The authorities would no doubt be quite happy to see the back of 
      someone such as this appellant, and it does not need arrest or detention 
      to show that the persecution which he recounted occurred.'
We are inclined to agree with Mr Haywood that the 
  Adjudicator has not given adequate consideration to the objective evidence 
  when considering the interest of the CIO in this appellant. At paragraph 23 of 
  his determination the Adjudicator states:
'I therefore find it implausible that the CIPU would go to the 
      lengths claimed to silence a political opponent such as the appellant. I 
      therefore find that if the CIO did contact the appellant, it had nothing 
      to do with any of his political activities.'
The two sentences are to some extent slightly at 
  variance. Be that as it may, the second sentence causes us some concern 
  because it ignores the fact that (a) the appellant was or had been a fairly 
  prominent member of the Liberty Party in Bulawayo, (b) that he was on record 
  as having been detained by the ZANU-PF at their headquarters for questioning 
  and severely maltreated in June 2000, and (c) the general objective material 
  which shows a policy of pursuit by the present government of all those who are 
  perceived to be opposed to its objectives. It is common ground, and it has 
  been accepted by the Adjudicator, that the appellant was not just an ordinary 
  member of the Liberty Party. He had been the head of the youth wing in 
  Bulawayo and was known for his work for that party in that area. It may well 
  be that the Liberty Party is one of virtual insignificance within the 
  political spectrum in Zimbabwe. With respect to Mr Buckley, that is not the 
  point in relation to this particular appellant when taken against the 
  objective evidence in relation to perceived opponents of the government. This 
  appellant was clearly perceived to be an opponent and we take the view that 
  the Adjudicator has not given sufficient cognisance to this perception, nor 
  has he given sufficient attention to the objective material relevant to the 
  policies of the present regime in Zimbabwe towards those who are perceived to 
  be its opponents.
For this reason, therefore we would take the view 
  that the appellant is perfectly entitled to assume that when he was contacted 
  by the CIO the purpose in contacting him was basically political and the 
  reason was no more than an excuse. This being so, it must follow that there 
  was a reasonable likelihood that the appellant had a fear of further 
  persecution were he to have answered the call of the CIO and attended their 
  offices. We therefore find that the appellant left the country for a 
  Convention reason.
We now consider whether there would be a 
  reasonable likelihood of persecution were he to return. The objective evidence 
  which is before us quite clearly show that there has been a considerable 
  deterioration in the position in Zimbabwe since the appellant left and we are 
  persuaded in particular by the letter of the UNHCR dated 12 June this year 
  that this appellant being, a perceived member of an opposition party, would be 
  at risk of further persecution were he to return. It must therefore follow 
  that he has established a Convention ground. It is not necessary therefore to 
  consider the Article 3 claim. The appeal is allowed.
M W RAPINET
VICE PRESIDENT
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/03598.html