NM (MDC) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 04263 (17 September 2002)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      NM (MDC) Zimbabwe [2002] UKIAT 04263 (17 September 2002)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/04263.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 04263,

[2002] UKIAT 4263
[
New search
]







[
Printable RTF version
]


[
Help
]
NM (MDC) Zimbabwe  [2002] UKIAT 04263
HX55633-2001
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 01 July 2002
Date Determination notified: 17 September 2002
Before
Professor D C Jackson (Chairman)
Mr C A N Edinboro
Between
NM
APPELLANT
and
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
RESPONDENT
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appellant a citizen of Zimbabwe appeals against 
  a decision of an Adjudicator (Mr B M Suchak) dismissing his appeal against a 
  refusal of leave to enter following a refusal of an asylum application. The 
  Appellant claims that removal would be in breach of both the Refugee 
  Convention and the Human Rights Convention. Before us the Appellant was 
  represented by Ms E A Storey of the Refugee Legal Centre and the Secretary of 
  State by Ms A Green.
The Appellant has been a professional footballer for 
  four years. His case is based on a threat of harassment and ill-treatment by 
  Zanu-PF supporters because of his membership of the opposition party Movement 
  for Democratic Change (MDC). The Appellant said he joined MDC in 1999 but his 
  problems with Zanu-PF started in September 2001. A group of members came round 
  to his mother's house where he was living and asked for him by name. They told 
  him he should stop working for the MDC, threatened him and said he would be 
  killed if he did not stop. When he reported this to his own party he was told 
  he was not the only MDC supporter that was having such problems. The party 
  told him to ignore the threats and that they were being made because of the 
  support that the MDC was getting. The matter was not reported to the police 
  because the Zanu-PF had warned the Appellant that if he went to the police 
  something bad would happen to him. A few days later men dressed in Zanu-PF 
  t-shirts stopped him and threatened him again saying that if he did not stop 
  campaigning they would kill him. Once again he reported it to his party but 
  not to the police as he did not take the threats seriously. He continued 
  campaigning.
The third incident which persuaded the Appellant to 
  leave Zimbabwe occurred in September when fifteen Zanu-PF men came to his 
  mother's house, took him outside and put him in a car and drove him to a 
  secret place. When they got to this place he was told that he would be killed 
  if he did not stop what he was doing. He was injured in the face through 
  slapping. Once again he reported it to the party and he was told not to take 
  the matter seriously as those who had harassed him were "just jealous".
After this incident the Appellant said he did not 
  feel safe at his home. He stayed in a variety of places often with friends. He 
  did not think the Zanu-PF members returned to his house while he was in 
  hiding. After the incident in September he stopped campaigning because he knew 
  he would be killed if he continued. He did not have any problems while he was 
  hiding but he stayed only for a short time. He decided to leave the country 
  because of the incident and the threats. He fears that if he returns he will 
  be seen as a traitor by Zanu-PF and, further, that as he has claimed asylum 
  they will believe that he has told stories about what goes on in Zimbabwe.
The Adjudicator's Approach
The Adjudicator accepted the Appellant's evidence 
  save insofar as that he pointed out that although the Appellant said he was in 
  hiding between September and November 2001 he did visit his parents' home. 
  However the Adjudicator felt that the Appellant was involved in a low level 
  way in MDC and the fact that the Zanu-PF supporters having abducted him 
  released him demonstrated a complete lack of interest in him. They did not 
  follow up the activities when he left home. In the light of the lack of 
  interest the Adjudicator concluded there was not a real risk of persecution or 
  breach of any Articles under the Human Rights Convention.
Included in the grounds of appeal in which leave was 
  granted is the assertion that the Adjudicator failed to take into account 
  relevant elements of the Appellant's case when assessing whether he would be 
  at risk if returned to Zimbabwe i.e.:
(a) The Appellant's profile in Bulawayo as a professional footballer 
  publicly supported the MDC.
(b) That the Appellant's mother had told the Zanu-PF that her son had gone 
  to South Africa to divert their hostile questioning.
(c) The evidence before the Adjudicator of increasing violence in the 
  February run-up to the elections.
In support of the argument as to increasing and 
  continuing violence further evidence was submitted going to the post-election 
  situation in Zimbabwe. Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that 
  continuing interest by Zanu-PF in the Appellant was arguable.
Before us objective evidence adduced was:
(1) (By the Secretary of State) the Country Assessment for 2002.
(2) (By the Appellant)
(a) A report entitled Zimbabwe: What Next? dated 14th June 2002 by the 
  International Crisis Group (ICG) which according to an appendix to the report 
  is a private multinational organisation committed to strengthening the 
  capacity of the international community to prevent and contain conflict, the 
  Board containing prominent figures from the fields of politics, diplomacy, 
  business and media.
(b) A report from the Physicians for Human Rights of Denmark dated 21st May 
  2002, "We Will Make Them Run", a study of post-presidential election 
  activities in Zimbabwe.
(c) Extracts from two reports on political violence connected with and 
  subsequent to the elections (dated 19th March 2002 and 28th March 2002) by the 
  Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum.
(d) A letter from the Home Office indicating that returns of failed asylum 
  seekers to Zimbabwe continued to be suspended.
Although returns are suspended the issue for us is 
  whether if the Appellant were returned there would be a serious possibility of 
  persecution or breach of his human rights. Ms Storey drew our attention to 
  various aspects of the objective evidence. She pointed to the statement in the 
  report of the Danish physicians that President Mugabe had stated publicly that 
  the government "intends to repress its political opponents" and a senior 
  member of Zanu has declared the government will not respect the rulings of a 
  court.
As to the obstacles in the way of an atmosphere in 
  which there could be political activity, Ms Storey pointed to the ICG report 
  in which is recorded that the Commonwealth empowered South Africa and Nigeria 
  to facilitate party to party talks between Zanu-PF and the MDC. Talks however 
  had been broken off at least on the surface because of the end of an MDC 
  lawsuit challenging the March elections. The report also points out that the 
  MDC is struggling to ensure its survival and that it was concerned at the 
  continuation of violence and intimidation against its supporters.
In the ICG's opinion any change in the disastrous 
  economic policy would depend upon political resolution. According to the 
  Danish physicians multiple accounts have been given of "across the board" 
  discrimination in some districts in which MDC supporters and their children 
  are systematically denied access to healthcare, schooling and food including 
  some international donor funded feeding schemes. The continuing violence is 
  supported by a report of specific cases contained in the report of the Danish 
  physicians. It was not safe, said Ms Storey to send the Appellant back - he 
  was a well known local figure who had actively campaigned for the MDC.
Ms Green stressed the need to focus on the 
  particular case. She argued that the Adjudicator considered all the objective 
  evidence. MDC support was not enough for the Appellant to succeed and there 
  was nothing exceptional in his case. The Adjudicator was correct in his 
  assessment of the evidence which was before him but Ms Green agreed that we 
  must consider the case in the light of the new objective evidence. Both 
  representatives agreed that in considering this evidence we should take into 
  account the purpose of the reports.
The objective evidence before the Tribunal
As the key to this case must lie in the up-to-date 
  objective evidence we turn first to that. In the CIPU Report it is recorded 
  (para 3.52) that after President Mugabe's victory in March 2002 "youths and 
  members of the police embarked upon a campaign of retribution against MDC 
  officials and suspected supporters". It is said that thousands of MDC 
  supporters including two MDC MPs fled their constituencies in Manicaland 
  province in a wave of violence that affected the area after the elections. 
  After the elections themselves, the report records the Commonwealth Observer 
  Group Report as noting that the elections are not allowed for a free 
  expression of the will of the electorate and castigated the police for 
  refusing to attend to reported cases of attacks against MDC supporters. In a 
  further comment (para 5.87) it is said that opposition political activists 
  particularly those belonging to the MDC have been targeted and attacked by 
  government supporters since the parliamentary elections in June 2000. There 
  were reports in 2001 of a growing number of abductions of MDC activists.
The report of the ICG records that in the 
  aftermath of the elections Zanu-PF party and the government "are 
  systematically using violence to intimidate the MDC". As Ms Storey pointed out 
  it records the stalling of the talks between the parties and the 
  discrimination and distribution of food in respect of MDC supporters. The 
  report of the Danish physicians points out that the political violence had 
  been systematically documented and analysed over the last two years and showed 
  that only a very small number of human rights violations were committed by 
  other than bodies affiliated to the government. It is said that post-election 
  period "politically motivated, government endorsed violence continues against 
  those perceived to be supporters of the opposition". The previous trend of 
  failure of the police to arrest and prosecute perpetrators of "political" 
  crimes continues. There is political manipulation of food distribution Cases 
  of pre and post-election violence against MDC supporters are listed. The 
  conclusion of the investigation is that political motivated torture continues 
  to be a post-election problem. It was noted that all of the thirteen cases 
  cited where there was torture or ill-treatment for political motives no 
  prosecutions against perpetrators were brought.
Included in the report is an extract from Zimbabwe 
  Human Rights NGO Forum Political Violence Report dated 3rd May 2002. It is 
  there said that with no impending elections there seemed no tangible 
  explanation for the political motivated violence still persisting in Zimbabwe 
  and that the post-election period had witnessed a sustained attack on known or 
  suspected supporters of the MDC. It is said that from the period 1st January 
  2002 to 30th April 2002 cumulative totals of cases reported to the 
  organisation included 961 cases of torture, 55 cases of death or execution and 
  144 of unlawful detention.
Conclusions
It seems to us the picture painted by the 
  objective evidence confirms that which comes across from reading any 
  newspapers i.e. that the immediate future in Zimbabwe is bleak. The objective 
  evidence points strongly to a continuation of political violence against the 
  MDC and its supporters and there is no indication that that violence is 
  confined or indeed targeted at leading MDC activists. Indeed in one case a 
  beating seems to have been administered simply because perceived MDC 
  supporters fled through the garden of the house of the person beaten.
Conclusions
On the Adjudicator's findings the Appellant was an 
  active MDC supporter even though as an activist he may have been at a low 
  level. In his asylum interview he indicated that he was on the Youth Campaign 
  Committee and that was how the Zanu-PF members or supporters knew who he was. 
  We accept that as a professional footballer he would be known within the local 
  community and it is clear from the evidence accepted that his support of the 
  MDC was also known. We appreciate that once he went into hiding he received no 
  further visits from Zanu-PF supporters but at that time he was not engaging in 
  any political act or expressing any political opinion.
All the objective evidence before us points to a 
  deterioration of the situation as regards the relationship between Zanu-PF and 
  the MDC. The reports on which we must primarily rely are the work of a 
  respectable organisation, the ICG has some high powered members on its board 
  and its aim is the laudable one of understanding and acting to prevent and 
  contain conflicts. In order to do that conflicts must be identified and we see 
  no reason to doubt either the tone or the details of its report. The 
  Physicians for Human Rights from Denmark is an organisation focussing on the 
  protection of human rights but that does not mean that its evidence is 
  slanted. While obviously it will stress the breaches of human rights we have 
  no reason to doubt that had the human rights record improved or had the risks 
  been lessened this would have been included in the report. Thirdly there is 
  nothing in the CIPU Report to contradict the evidence in the other reports 
  before us and indeed it refers to a campaign of retribution against MDC 
  officials and "suspected supporters".
There is clearly a risk of violence which is to be 
  run by any MDC supporter in the current climate. On the other hand specific 
  cases cited in the reports are relatively few in number if one takes into 
  account the fact that the MDC is one of the major political parties in 
  Zimbabwe. But all the reports refer to the continuing campaign of violence 
  against MDC supporters. The Appellant is a known such supporter, and is no 
  doubt known within the community within which he lives. On the evidence before 
  us it seems to us that there is some degree of risk of ill-treatment if the 
  Appellant were to be returned to Zimbabwe because of his past actions. If 
  however he continued to be active politically that risk would on the objective 
  evidence be substantially increased. While it is true that the Convention is 
  not an instrument to be used to protect a person from activities from which he 
  could desist without any interference in any fundamental right, in our view 
  the right to political participation is such a right and is protected by the 
  Convention.
Further in the context of Zimbabwe the threat made 
  by Zanu-PF supporters would seem to be by agents either directly of the state 
  or at least encouraged by the government. Secondly there is no evidence to 
  show that police interest in such violence is such as to provide any kind of 
  adequate protection.
The Adjudicator took the view that because the 
  Appellant had been released by Zanu-PF supporters then he was of no interest 
  to them. We respectfully disagree with that view for it has to be remembered 
  that when the Appellant was released the threat was made to kill him if he 
  continued campaigning for the MDC. Further the fact of release does not of 
  itself mean that interest in the person released ceases. It simply means that 
  on that particular occasion the matter would be taken no further. In any event 
  on the objective evidence before us the current situation in Zimbabwe is if 
  anything worse than it was when the Adjudicator heard the case and certainly 
  worse than that reflected in the letter of the reasons for refusal (dated 21st 
  November 2001).
In the particular circumstances of this Appellant 
  given the knowledge of his active support for the MDC and his occupation in 
  his community we hold on the evidence adduced before us that as at the date of 
  the hearing before us there is a serious possibility of persecution should the 
  Appellant be returned to Zimbabwe. The asylum claim therefore succeeds.
As to the human rights claim, before the 
  Adjudicator the Appellant relied on Articles 2, 3, 5 and 8. For the reasons 
  advanced in relation to the asylum claim the Appellant succeeds on his claim 
  based on the right of protection from ill-treatment set out in Article 3. 
  There is therefore no need to consider claims under the other provisions and 
  we were not addressed in regard to them.
The appeal is allowed.
D C JACKSON
CHAIRMAN
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/04263.html