Immigration Officer Terminal 2 Heathrow vs BN (family members, ECHR Art 8, proportionality) Chile [2002] UKIAT 05225 (13 November 2002)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      Immigration Officer Terminal 2 Heathrow vs BN (family members, ECHR Art 8, proportionality) Chile [2002] UKIAT 05225 (13 November 2002)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/05225.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 05225,

[2002] UKIAT 5225
[
New search
]








[
Help
]
Immigration Officer Terminal 2 Heathrow vs BN (family members, 
  ECHR Art 8, proportionality) Chile [2002] UKIAT 05225
TH17839-02
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 16 October 2002
Date Determination notified: 13 November 2002
Before
Mr T S Culver
Mrs E Morton
Between
Immigration Officer Terminal 2 
        Heathrow
APPELLANT
and
BN
RESPONDENT
Appellant - Mr S Ouseley Home Office Presenting Officer.
Respondent - Mr P Dakora of Mathis Solicitors.
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The appellant the Immigration Officer at Heathrow 
  Terminal 2 appeals with leave of the Tribunal against the determination of an 
  Adjudicator ( Mr P M Petheridge ), who allowed the appeal of the respondent 
  against the decision of the appellant made on 13 September 2001 to refuse 
  leave to enter on the basis that the appellant's claim does not fall within 
  the Immigration Rules.
The appeal of the respondent was based on Section 65 
  of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and the assertion that his right to 
  family life under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR) 
  would be violated by his removal and upon the rights granted by the European 
  Economic Union in regard to his wife who is an Italian national seeking to 
  exercise her rights to work in this country
The claim of the respondent depends of the following 
  facts:
(a) He has lived with Ms Zambelli Quintalla in Chile from 1986 
    to February 2000 and they have two sons aged 13 and 16 years.
(b) They have never married because the respondent was 
    previously married. There is no divorce in Chile and the respondent had told 
    the Immigration Officer that he did not obtain an annulment because he could 
    not afford the costs and it is a lengthy process.
(c) Ms Quintalla is both a Chilean national and an Italian 
    National through her parents. In February 2000 she came to the United 
    Kingdom to visit her brother and look for work. She was followed by their 
    two sons in September and December of that year.
(d) She lived in a council house of which she was the tenant and 
    on public benefits until January 2001 when she worked for some time but was 
    not in employment when the respondent arrived in this country. She was again 
    in employment at the time of hearing of the appeal before the adjudicator in 
    June of this year.
The respondent, a citizen of Chile, arrived in the 
  United Kingdom on 12 March 2001 and sought entrance for 3 months as a student 
  at the Stanton School of English. He stated that he worked for a fish export 
  business and his employers had funded his visit to the United Kingdom. He 
  stated that he had no family or friends in the United Kingdom.
The appellant refused his claim for asylum because 
  his suggestion that he came here to study was clearly false and he had no 
  lawful basis for admission and the matter came before the adjudicator.
The adjudicator accepted The appellant had 
  demonstrated both a wilful disregard for the Immigration Rules and a ready 
  willingness to employ deception on arrival. He noted that; The Immigration 
  Service were of the view that the appellant's account on arrival contained so 
  many fabrications and was so extensively contradicted by his partner that some 
  of the details relating to the appellant's personal circumstances in Chile had 
  still not been satisfactorily established.
He notes; It would have been open to the appellant 
  to apply in the proper fashion for the requisite entry clearance. The 
  appellant [sic] could with her sons if they wished obviously return to Chile.
However he found both the appellant and Ms Quintalla 
  credible in the evidence they gave before him. He accepted that they had a 
  family life together. He states; I am satisfied from the evidence I have heard 
  that this is a family intent on being self-supporting and anxious through all 
  its members to make a positive contribution to this country.
He noted that the boys were doing well in school in 
  this country their only difficulty being their knowledge of English.
He concludes that the removal of the appellant 
  would be disproportionate to the legitimate aims of the United Kingdom in 
  immigration control and hence in violation of the Article 8 of the ECHR. On 
  that basis he allows the appeal.
We will begin by considering the position under 
  the EEA. Mr Dakora argued that Ms Quintalla as an Italian national is entitled 
  to come to this country to seek employment. He argued that even though she 
  relied on public funds from time to time she has also worked and so at the 
  time of the decision was entitled to be treated as worker.
He cited to us the MRAX case decided by the 
  European Court of Justice on 25 July 2002 which decides that it is not 
  consistent with EEC law to require a visa for the spouse of an EEA national 
  exercising their rights under the treaty. He argued the case shows that such a 
  spouse may not be returned merely because they have failed to comply with 
  legal formalities concerning the control of aliens.
Mr Ouseley did not dissent from that suggestion. 
  But the regulation referred to in that case refers to a spouse and this 
  respondent is not a spouse and the regulations do not apply to him.
Mr Dakora replied that European regulations extend 
  the meaning of spouse in that if a concession is made for a national it must 
  also be available to a person seeking to exercise his rights under Community 
  legislation.
Mr Ouseley did not dissent from that suggestion 
  either but he said the same concession applies to EEA nationals and British 
  citizens and that this appellant does not fall within the scope of the 
  concession which requires;
(a) The passenger holds a valid entry clearance appropriately 
    endorsed
(b) That there is no reason to believe that false 
    representations were made in order to obtain the entry clearance.
He argued that the appellant in this case failed 
  on both counts in that he had no entry clearance and had attempted to use 
  false representations to obtain entry.
Mr Dakora replied this was the very sort of visa 
  or legal formality held to be unlawful in the MRAX case.
We do not agree. The MRAX case refers to the need 
  for production of proof of identity and proof of marriage. These are matters 
  which are generally straightforward to prove and can be proved by documents. 
  The matters which must be shown to fall within the concession for unmarried 
  partners may well require investigation in the home country.
These include that the couple have lived together 
  for at least 2 years, that any previous marriage has broken down and that the 
  parties are unable to marry under United Kingdom law and the other matters 
  which are required of an application for a spouse.
We believe these are far more than legal 
  formalities and that it is entirely appropriate for the Secretary of State to 
  require an entry clearance before entry to the United Kingdom.
Therefore this case does not fall to be decided 
  under this aspect of European law and it was not under this principal that the 
  adjudicator allowed the appeal. He acted under article 8 of the ECHR.
Mr Ouseley criticised the decision of the 
  adjudicator in that he did not properly consider the question of 
  proportionality. He considered the situation of the respondent and Ms 
  Quintilla but he did not consider the legitimate goal of the Secretary of 
  State to maintain orderly immigration control.
He suggested that it is clearly proportionate to 
  require the respondent to comply with the conditions of the Secretary of 
  State's concession. He accepted that it may well be that the respondent will 
  succeed and be able to return within a few months, that will be a matter for 
  the entry clearance officer in Chile.
Mr Dakora replied that it would not be 
  proportionate to remove the respondent. He has settled here with his partner 
  and their children and it would not be right to remove him.
The Court of Appeal considered the application of 
  Article 8 in immigration matters in the case of Amjad Mahmood
(2001) ImmAR 229
. Having reviewed the authorities from the European Court of Human Rights 
  the Master of the Rolls set out certain conclusions as to the application of 
  Article 8 to the enforcement of immigration controls at page 249:
i. A State has a right under international law to control the 
    entry of non-nationals into its territory, subject to its treaty 
  obligations.
ii. Article 8 does not impose on a State any general obligation 
    to respect the choice of residence of a married couple.
iii. Removal or exclusion of one family member from a State 
    where other members of the family are lawfully resident will not necessarily 
    infringe Article 8 provided that there are no insurmountable obstacles to 
    the family living together in the country of origin of the family member 
    excluded, even where this involves a degree of hardship for some or all 
    members of the family.
iv. Article 8 is likely to be violated by the expulsion of a 
    family member of a family that has been long established in a State if the 
    circumstances are such that it is not reasonable to expect the other members 
    of the family to follow the member expelled.
v. Knowledge on the part of one spouse at the time of marriage 
    that rights of residence of the other were precarious militates against a 
    finding that an order excluding the latter spouse violates Article 
  8.
vi. Whether interference with family rights is justified in the 
    interests of controlling immigration will depend on:
1. the facts of the particular case and
2. the circumstances prevailing in the State whose action is 
      impugned.
We apply those principals to this case. We begin 
  by accepting the finding of the adjudicator that there is family life existing 
  between the respondent his partner and their children. Although their 
  relationship has lasted some 16 years, most of that time they were in Chile. 
  They have not been established in this country for a long period of time. The 
  respondent has only been here for a year and a half.
Having accepted family life we proceed with the 
  step by step process recommended in many cases. The first question is whether 
  his removal would be in accordance with the law. Clearly it would: he has no 
  right to live in this country. He attempted to gain admission by deception and 
  was only granted temporary admission so that the questions involved in this 
  appeal could be dealt with.
The next step is to consider the goal of the 
  State. It is here clearly to maintain an orderly immigration control. It is 
  well established that this is a legitimate goal within a democratic society.
Finally we come to what is generally the most 
  difficult question in cases involving limited rights and that is the question 
  of proportionality. It is here that we feel the adjudicator went astray.
If one focuses on the facts of this case and the 
  goal of the Secretary of State we feel it becomes clear that it would be 
  proportionate. Surely the goal of an orderly immigration control would be 
  completely undermined if it were possible for someone to come to this country 
  and attempt by fraud to enter and having failed that assert that his family 
  rights would be infringed if he were not allowed to enter based on a 
  relationship that had never existed in the United Kingdom.
If we focus on the time of the decision, as we 
  must, the family had never lived in this country as a family. It is open to 
  the respondent to make a fresh application from Chile or for his partner and 
  their children to accompany him back to Chile and there assist him with a 
  lawful application under the concession if they so wish.
The ECHR must not become a vehicle for getting 
  around the normal immigration rules for those who can not be bothered or do 
  not choose to use them.
Thomas S Culver
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/05225.html