MS Somalia [2002] UKIAT 06698 (23 February 2003)
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      MS Somalia [2002] UKIAT 06698 (23 February 2003)
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/06698.html
Cite as: 
[2002] UKIAT 6698,

[2002] UKIAT 06698
[
New search
]








[
Help
]
MS Somalia [2002] UKIAT 06698
HX 14176-02
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 27 November 2002
Date Determination notified: 23 February 2003
Before
Mr P R Moulden (Chairman)
Mr M. Shrimpton
Mr A. F. Sheward
Between
MS
APPELLANT
and
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
RESPONDENT
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia. She has been 
  given leave to appeal the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr M. A. Khan) 
  dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision to give directions for 
  her removal from the United Kingdom and to refuse asylum.
Mr P Anim-Addo of Council instructed by Develmi 
  & Co, Solicitors, appeared for the Appellant. Mr C. Buckley, a Home Office 
  Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.
The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on about 
  16 July 2001. She claimed asylum on 20 July. The notice containing the 
  decision against which she appeals is dated 31 October 2001. The Adjudicator 
  heard the appeal on 13 May 2002 and leave to appeal was granted on 17 
  September 2002.
The Appellant claimed to fear persecution and 
  infringement of her human rights in Somalia because of her membership of a 
  minority sub clan. She said that she and her family were attacked, beaten up, 
  tortured and their belongings destroyed or looted. The Adjudicator found that 
  she was not a credible witness. Whilst accepting that she was a citizen of 
  Somalia, he did not accept that she belonged to a minority clan or that she 
  and her family had suffered as claimed. He concluded that she had not 
  established a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason or that 
  her human rights were likely to be infringed. The first of the two grounds of 
  appeal does no more than repeat the claim that the Appellant has a 
  well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia. However, at the hearing Mr 
  Anim-Addo pursued only the second grounds of appeal under Article 8.
In relation to Article 8 the Adjudicator found that 
  the Appellant had spent only a short time with her siblings in the United 
  Kingdom. She had spent most of her life with first her parents and then her 
  uncle and his family in Somalia. After her siblings left Somalia she did not 
  know where they were and they did little to find out where she was or what was 
  happening to her. The Appellant has two brothers in the United Kingdom who are 
  British citizens and a sister who has indefinite leave to remain. She is 
  living with her younger brother. The Adjudicator found that the period spent 
  with her siblings in the United Kingdom was very short and that she had not 
  established a family life with them. Article 8 was not engaged and would not 
  be breached by her removal to Somalia.
We have no documents from the Appellant's 
  representatives although, during the hearing, we allowed Mr Anim-Addo to 
  submit a copy of page 8.57 of the fifth edition of Macdonald. The Respondent 
  submitted copies of two decisions of the European Commission of Human Rights,
S and S v United Kingdom
delivered on 10 December 1984 and
Advic v 
  United Kingdom
delivered on 6 September 1995.
Both representatives accepted that we could repair 
  any defects in the Adjudicator's determination and it was not necessary to 
  remit to him or another Adjudicator.
Mr Anim-Addo submitted that the Appellant did not 
  have a family life in Somalia. She had a lifelong relationship with her 
  siblings and it was not likely that she could establish a family life on her 
  own or with them in Somalia. He submitted that she was a member of a minority 
  clan and persisted in the submission after we pointed out that the Adjudicator 
  had concluded otherwise. He accepted that the Appellant and her siblings were 
  likely to belong to the same clan or sub clan but argued that the Adjudicator 
  should have made specific findings with regard to her siblings, not just the 
  Appellant.
We asked Mr Anim-Addo if he wished to address us on 
  proportionality. In doing so he did no more than rely on the judgment of the 
  Court of Appeal in
Mahmood
and said that it would be extreme to remove 
  the Appellant.
Mr Buckley took us to
Advic
and submitted 
  that on this authority the Appellant did not have a family life with her 
  siblings in the United Kingdom. She had lived in the United Kingdom for a very 
  short period. At the date of the Respondent's decision she had been in the 
  United Kingdom for 2 or 3 months. There had been no contact between her and 
  her siblings after they left Somalia. There was no evidence of dependency 
  beyond normal ties between siblings. He submitted that Article 8 was not 
  engaged. There was no evidence of how her siblings had achieved British 
  citizenship or indefinite leave to remain. There was no evidence of 
  insurmountable obstacles to any of them returning to Somalia. He submitted 
  that there would be no interference with family life but, if we were against 
  him, on all the evidence it would, in the interests of immigration control, be 
  proportionate to return her to Somalia.
In reply Mr Anim-Addo said that there were 
  insurmountable obstacle to her return but did not specify what they were. Her 
  siblings could not go and live with her in Somalia.
The passage in McDonald's relied on by Mr 
  Anim-Addo states, "Generally, relationships between adult siblings or adult 
  children and their parents will not fall within the scope of Article 8, but in 
  each case it is a question of fact whether there exists ties strong enough to 
  constitute family life within the meaning of the Article. Whether a 
  relationship amounts to "family life" depends on the substance as much as 
  form; so informal heterosexual relationships of sufficient substance and 
  stability have been classified as "family life", although stable homosexual 
  relationships have not."
In
Advic
the Commission said, 
  "Nevertheless, in accordance with the Commission's case law, the exclusion of 
  a person from the country in which his close relatives reside may raise an 
  issue under Article 8 of the Convention. However, in examining cases of this 
  nature the Commission's first task is to consider whether a sufficient link 
  exists between the relatives concerned to give rise to the protection of the 
  Article of the Convention. Although this will depend on the circumstances of 
  each particular case, the Commission has already considered that the 
  protection of Article 8 did not cover links between adult brothers who had 
  been living apart for a long period of time and who were not dependent on each 
  other. Moreover, the relationship between a parents and an adult child would 
  not necessarily acquired the protection of Article 8 of the Convention without 
  evidence of further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal 
  emotional ties".
In the circumstances we find that the Adjudicator 
  was right to conclude that the Appellant had not established a family life in 
  the United Kingdom with her siblings. They had lived apart, she in Somalia, 
  they in the United Kingdom, for a considerable time, without any contact. 
  After her arrival in the United Kingdom and at the date of the decision she 
  had resumed contact and lived with one of her brothers for only some three 
  months. There is no evidence of any greater dependency. Apart from any 
  inference which may arise purely from the fact that she is living with her 
  brother, there is no evidence of dependency involving more than the normal 
  emotional ties. On the evidence before him and the same evidence before us the 
  Adjudicator was entitled to conclude that the Appellant had not established a 
  family life with her siblings in the United Kingdom.
If we were wrong in this then to return the 
  Appellant would be an interference with family life. It would be in accordance 
  with the law. We find that it would be proportionate to a legitimate aim. We 
  have no evidence that the Appellant's siblings could not travel with her to 
  Somalia or visit her there. The facts, which we accept, are that the two 
  brothers are British citizens and her sister has indefinite leave to remain. 
  They have not established how they achieved such status, that they are 
  refugees or, even if they were refugees, that there is still some reason why 
  they cannot go to Somalia. Mr Anim-Addo accepts that the Appellant and her 
  siblings are likely to belong to the same clan and sub clan. In circumstances 
  where the Adjudicator found that the Appellant did not belong to a persecuted 
  minority clan there was no need for him to make separate findings about her 
  siblings. On all the evidence, had it been necessary for us to do so, we would 
  have concluded that it would be proportionate to return the Appellant to 
  Somalia.
For these reasons we dismissed this appeal.
.
P. R. Moulden
Vice President
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/2002/06698.html