Chiver (Asylum; Discrimination; Employment; Persecution) (Romania) [1994] UKIAT 10758 (24 March 1994 )
If you found BAILII useful today, could you please make a contribution?
Your donation will help us maintain and extend our databases of legal information. No contribution is too small. If every visitor this month donates, it will have a significant impact on BAILII's ability to continue providing free access to the law.
Thank you very much for your support!
[
Home
]
    [
Databases
]
    [
World Law
]
    [
Multidatabase Search
] 
    [
Help
]
    [
Feedback
]
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
You are here:
BAILII
>>
Databases
>>
United Kingdom Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
>>
      
      Chiver (Asylum; Discrimination; Employment; Persecution) (Romania) [1994] UKIAT 10758 (24 March 1994 )
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/1994/10758.html
Cite as: 
[1994] UKIAT 10758,

[1997] INLR 212
[
New search
]








[
Help
]
JISCBAILII_CASE_IMMIGRATION
Chiver (Asylum; Discrimination; Employment; Persecution) 
  (Romania) [1994] UKIAT 10758 (24 March 1994)
HX-70386-93
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Date of hearing: 10/03/1994
Date Determination notified: 24 March 1994
Before
Professor D. C. Jackson (Chair)
Mr. P. Rogers JP
Mr. A. G. Jeevanjee
Between
Secretary of State for the Home 
        Department
APPELLANT
and
ADRIAN GHEORGHE 
CHIVER
RESPONDENT
DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of an adjudicator 
  (Professor K. Counter) allowing the appeal of Mr. Adrian Chiver against a 
  decision to give removal directions as an illegal entrant, Mr. Chiver 
  asserting that his removal would be contrary to the Refugee Convention. Before 
  us the Secretary of State was represented by Mr. A. Gammons and Mr. Chiver by 
  Mr. A. Kulacar of the Free Representation Unit.
The decision to give directions was made on 14 September 1993. On his 
  appeal the appellant gave evidence before the adjudicator. In his 
  determination promulgated on 29 December 1993 the adjudicator set out in some 
  detail the evidence before him commenting on the evidence as he reviewed it. 
  The adjudicator concluded his determination:
"My overall conclusion is therefore this. There must be some doubt whether, 
  if the appellant were returned to Romania, he would be detained and 
  ill-treated. But whether that is the case or not there is a clear case of 
  persecution for a Convention reason in the fact that he has been excluded 
  because of his beliefs from both employment and benefit. I do not think that 
  any of the discrepancies in his evidence nor indeed his disclaimers can 
  destroy the general line of the story. I find that he was persecuted in the 
  sense that he was discriminated against, deprived of the opportunity of 
  employment and deprived on the same basis of State benefits. I believe that if 
  he were returned to Romania that would continue. He is therefore in genuine 
  fear of persecution, and for the reasons I have stated I find that he has a 
  well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason. It is indeed the 
  case that the picture in the round which emerges from the evidence as a whole 
  shows an appellant who was actually fleeing persecution. It seems to me very 
  clearly to be the case that the only circumstance in which that would not be 
  so would be one where the discrimination was not properly regarded as 
  persecution. I do not know what led to the signing of the disclaimers. But the 
  discrimination actually preventing employment in this case is clearly based on 
  the political opinions of the appellant and it has a radical effect on his 
  life.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal."
The Secretary of State was granted leave to appeal on grounds which 
  referred to doubts expressed by the adjudicator as to the appellant's version 
  of events and the appellant's evidence. Further, it was said, the adjudicator 
  had erred in that he had equated any discrimination that has occurred with 
  persecution.
Mr. Chiver's evidence
The respondent's case, as Mr. Kulscar outlined to us and as the adjudicator 
  indicated in his conclusion, is that he had suffered serious discrimination in 
  being barred from employment and State benefits because of his political 
  opinions. Mr. Chiver was a miner and he said a member of the Parti Dul 
  Liberal, a political party supporting democracy and opposed to the Communist 
  Party. In April 1990 there was a demonstration in the University Square of 
  Bucharest by opponents of President Iliescu. On 13 June miners were summoned 
  by Iliescu to disperse those gathered in the square. Mr. Chiver said that he 
  was one of those ordered to go to Bucharest but because of his opposition to 
  Iliescu he refused to go.
As a consequence of his refusal, said Mr. Chiver, he was sacked from his 
  job at the mine. As the adjudicator records, on 15 June Mr. Chiver went to the 
  mine to talk to the Director but an argument ensued. He said he received a 
  summons to report to the police station, but he refused to go. Police came 
  looking for him but he avoided them by going to stay with his brother until 
  October or November of 1990.
About then Mr. Chiver returned to the mine but was unable to get his job 
  back or secure the return of his work card. In November 1990 he attempted to 
  leave Romania but was stopped at the Austria/Hungary border and returned to 
  Budapest where he was held in a detention camp for six months and then in 
  April 1991 returned to Romania. He spent more time with his brother and then 
  left the country reaching the United Kingdom later that year. He was returned 
  from the United Kingdom to Romania but during 1992 he made two more attempts 
  to enter this country. On one of these occasions he jumped overboard and 
  seriously injured himself. He then returned to Bucharest and to his parents.
In April 1993 he decided to go back to the mine to ask for his work card. 
  They would not give him the card nor would they give him work. He did not 
  receive any state benefit. He then went to an employment agency and saw the 
  Director. There then occurs an uncertainty as to his story. In his asylum 
  interview he is recorded as saying that the Employment Centre needed his work 
  card so he went to get it from the Director of the mine. It was stamped 
  "drunkard, does not come to work any more". The Employment Centre would not 
  help him with this stamp on his card. When he asked for invalidity benefit it 
  was refused.
Mr. Chiver told the adjudicator, however, that when he went to the 
  employment agency he told the Director that he had been dismissed for three 
  years from the mine because he had refused to go to Bucharest with the miners. 
  The Director of the employment agency then rang the mine and was told Mr. 
  Chiver was sacked for poor attendance. When the Director of the employment 
  agency asked for the work card, the person at the mine put the telephone down. 
  The Director of the employment agency told Mr. Chiver to go back to the mine. 
  Mr. Chiver said there was no point - he could not get benefit or another job 
  without the work card
Mr. Chiver said that after this he went on a hunger strike, and was 
  arrested. The police had a file on him and he was beaten by policemen. He was 
  accused of being a monarchist and questioned about the miners' actions in 
  1990. Mr. Chiver described his journey from Bucharest to this country.
In answer to questions by his counsel Mr. Chiver said that when he left the 
  United Kingdom in 1992 to go to Bucharest he did not sign a form saying that 
  he had no fear of persecution in Romania.
He said he had signed something in November 1991. He said that the 
  situation in Romania had not improved.
The Adjudicator's Determination
Mr. Kulscar took us in some detail through the adjudicator's determination.
It is necessary to look at it closely, for the Secretary of State's case 
  before us focused on two aspects - first, that the adjudicator had recorded 
  that certain discrepancies needed explanation but then had not explained how 
  he took into account the lack of explanation, and secondly, that there was no 
  evidential finding in relation to the non-receipt of state benefits. These two 
  points were made in the context of the general point that, as stated in the 
  grounds of appeal, the adjudicator had on several occasions commented on the 
  lack of credibility of Mr. Chiver's evidence.
At the start of his determination the adjudicator referred to the 
  background to the case and in particular to Mr. Chiver's former arrival and 
  stay in this country and the Secretary of State's grounds for refusing asylum. 
  The adjudicator then set out a number of issues which he thought the case 
  posed - whether there had been significant changes in the political situation 
  in Romania, the credibility of Mr. Chiver, the motivation for leaving Romania 
  and coming to this country and finally whether in so doing he was fleeing 
  persecution.
As to the credibility of Mr. Chiver, the adjudicator pointed to numerous 
  inconsistencies and evidence which he felt he (the adjudicator) could not 
  believe. So, there were two different stories about the hunger strike and 
  about the source of the failure to secure the return of his job. As to the 
  latter, Mr. Gammons relied for his contention that the adjudicator's 
  determination could not stand on the following passage:
"The inconsistencies continue. At the hearing, the appellant entirely 
  denies that his failure to secure the return of his job or to secure benefit 
  was anything to do with what was written on his card or cards, held by the 
  mine. It is inescapable, and it must require some explanation, that Mr. Chiver 
  initially said that his card was marked to the effect that he was a drunkard 
  and did not come to work any more." ;
The adjudicator said that the claim of the appellant was based on events in 
  1990 and events flowing from them. But, continued the adjudicator, "the 
  details as given by the appellant do lack credibility". The adjudicator had 
  said earlier in his determination that it was strange that Mr. Chiver did not 
  know the identity of others who had refused to go to Bucharest to put down the 
  demonstrators and that there was some confusion about the description of the 
  treatment he had received from the police. The adjudicator said that "very 
  substantial discrepancies mar the credibility of the appellant but "on the 
  other hand" he was someone who had shown a determination to enter the United 
  Kingdom.
In his conclusion the adjudicator said that there was evidence to suggest 
  that there was an improvement in the situation in Romania but that were Mr. 
  Chiver to return, the file recording his movements from Romania would still be 
  in existence and probably bring the matter back to the notice of the police. 
  The adjudictor continued:
"Then there is the matter of his employment itself. It seems to 
    me that when the appellant left Romania he believed himself to be, and as 
    far as I can see he was, discriminated against because of what he had 
    refused to do when the miners were called upon to go to Bucharest. It does 
    not seem to me that it is relevant what his motivation was for refusing, 
    assuming that in any case he did not believe in what was going on because he 
    was not in favour of it - that being one reason at least - he refused to 
    join in. I am inclined to think that in that situation whatever was marked 
    on his employment record may well have been an excuse for the way in which 
    he was treated. At any rate, I believe his story that when he went back to 
    resume his employment he was told that because he had not co-operated in 
    quelling the demonstration in Bucharest there was no work for 
  him."
The adjudicator's determination then concluded with the passage which we 
  have already cited.
The case Mr. Chiver must make
When the case first came before the Tribunal it was adjourned for the 
  parties to consider the case the appellant must make given that it is 
  essentially dependent on the inability to obtain work or benefits. The 
  relevant provisions of statute and rules are those contained in the Asylum and 
  Immigration Appeals Act 1993 section 2 and HC 251 paragraph 180B (as inserted 
  by HC 725). The "Convention" there referred to is the Convention Relating to 
  the Status of Refugees l951 and the Protocol 1967.
The 1993 Act "2. Nothing in the immigration rules (within the meaning of 
  the 1971 Act) shall lay down any practice which would be contrary to the 
  Convention.
HC 251
180B. A person will be granted asylum in the United Kingdom if the 
  Secretary of State is satisfied that:
a. he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry in the 
  United Kingdom; and
b. he is a refugee, as defined by the Convention and Protocol; and
c. refusing his application would result in his being required to go, 
  (whether immediately or after the time limited by an existing leave to enter 
  or remain) in breach of the Convention and Protocol, to a country in which his 
  life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, 
  nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion."
Persecution and discrimination
As is well known the Convention provides the definition of a refugee in 
  Article 1(2). So far as relevant to this case the provision reads that a 
  refugee is a person who
"owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of 
    race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or 
    political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable 
    or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of 
    that country..."
To establish that he is a refugee the appellant must show that he is in 
  such fear and that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood of persecution 
  for a Convention reason were he to be returned to Romania (Sivakumaran v. 
  Secretarv of State
[1988] Imm AR 147
).
The Handbook of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on 
  procedures and criteria for determining refugee status deals with the question 
  of discrimination as persecution. It is pointed out that discrimination may 
  amount to persecution "if measures of discrimination lead to consequences of a 
  substantially prejudicial nature for the persons concerned, e.g. serious 
  restrictions on his right to earn his livelihood..." In R v IAT ex narte Jonah 
  [1985] Imm AR 7 it was held that "persecution" in the context of Article 1A of 
  the Convention should be given its ordinary meaning of "to pursue with 
  malignancy or injurious action". In Jonah, which in the grounds of appeal the 
  Secretary of State sought to distinguish from the present case, it was held 
  that it was persecution where to escape material risk to his life the 
  applicant would have to live in a remote village.
We accept that this case is to be distinguished from Jonah. However, the 
  Secretary of State did not seek at the hearing to rely on any contention that 
  if the appellant's story is to be believed it still would not amount to 
  persecution. We agree with the adjudicator that persecution for a Convention 
  reason will be shown if the appellant establishes a reasonable likelihood that 
  he will be unable to obtain employment because of the lack of a work card, 
  that the lack of the work card was due to the sackinq from the mine and that 
  the sacking from the mine was due to the refusal to participate in putting 
  down the demonstration in 1990. The case for the appellant that he is a 
  refugee depends therefore, as so many do, on the view taken of the appellant's 
  version of events. We return to this issue after deciding whether the showing 
  of such persecution establishes the asylum claim.
Does the showing of "persecution" establish the asylum claim?
The legal issue is, whether it is sufficient for the appellant to establish 
  that he is a refugee or whether he must in accordance with the apparent 
  wording of HC 251 paragraph 180B show, in addition that his life or freedom 
  would be threatened if returned to Romania. If Mr. Chiver must establish that, 
  there must then be a question as to whether the prohibition entering 
  employment is a threat to his freedom.
Mr. Gammons and Mr. Kulscar were agreed on the primacy of the Convention 
  over any inconsistency in the rules. It then must follow that Mr. Chiver's 
  task is solely to show that he is a refugee within the meaning of the 
  Convention. We should consider, however, whether there is any inconsistency.
The reference in 180B paragraph c. to the threat to life or freedom is a 
  reflection of the non-refoulement provision of the Convention as set out in 
  Article 33. Article 33.1 reads:
"No contracting state shall expel or return ("refoule") a 
    refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territory where his 
    life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, 
    nationality, membership of a particular social group or political 
  opinion."
Mr. Kulscar drew our attention to a comment in Sivakumaran on the 
  relationship between Article 1A and Article 33 of the Convention and put 
  before us a note from the United Nations Commissioner for Refugees in respect 
  of the issue in the case before us. In Sivakumaran Lord Bridge adverted to a 
  suggestion which had been made in the Court of Appeal that "even if the 
  Secretary of State decides that an applicant is a refugee as defined in 
  Article 1 nevertheless he has then to decide whether Article 33 which involves 
  an objective test prohibits "the return of the applicant to the relevant 
  country".
Lord Bridge said he was unable to accept that approach but considered it 
  plain "that the non-refoulement provision in Article 33 was intended to apply 
  to all persons determined to be refugees under Article 1 of the Convention". 
  In other words, it would appear that the dominant provision is in Article 1A 
  and that the right of non-refoulement attaches to a "refugee" rather than 
  being a part of the definition of that status.
In the comment on behalf of the High Commissioner it is said that Article 
  33 in focusing on life or freedom was not intended to lay down a stricter 
  criterion than "well-founded fear of persecution" appearing in Article 1A.2. 
  The different wording, it is suggested, was introduced to make it clear that 
  "the principle of non-refoulement applies not only in respect of the country 
  of origin but any country where a person has reason to fear persecution". The 
  note also points out that the application of Article 33 is not dependent on 
  the lawful residence of a refugee in the territory of a contracting state and 
  to that extent presumably must be matched with the obligation in Article 32 
  not to expel a refugee lawfully in the territory of the state "save on grounds 
  of national security or public order".
These comments support the view therefore the rights of expulsion or 
  non-refoulement flow from the status of a refugee and that the basic 
  obligation of member states under the Convention is not to return a person to 
  a country of his nationality if in the relation to that country there is a 
  well-founded fear of being persecuted for a Convention reason. The obligations 
  set out in Articles 32 and 33 are additional.
As Mr. Gammons and Mr. Kulscar further said, it is recognised that it would 
  be no breach of the Convention to return a person to a country other than that 
  of his nationality in relation to which there was no fear of persecution nor 
  any fear of being returned to the country in which persecution was feared - in 
  other words, a "safe third country". The safe third country concept is set out 
  in paragraph 180K in the immigration rules and is defined as one
"in which the life or freedom of the asylum applicant would not 
    be threatened (within the meaning of Article 33 of the Convention) and the 
    government of which would not send the applicant elsewhere in a manner 
    contrary to the principles of the Convention..."
In so far as paragraph 180B referred to the threat of life or freedom it 
  must, said Mr. Kulscar, be referring to the third safe country case. In this 
  case, however, if Mr. Chiver was required to leave the United Kingdom it would 
  be to the country in which he faced persecution and sub-paragraph c. of 180B 
  has no role to play. Mr. Kulscar commented that the rules perhaps had not been 
  drafted in quite as precise a manner as would have been desirable. We agree.
We are happy to adopt the basic proposition on which Mr. Gammons and Mr. 
  Kulscar are agreed, i.e. the primacy of the Convention. Without entering the 
  somewhat sensitive area of jurisdiction to discuss or consider whether a rule 
  is "ultra vires" it must be incumbent on the Tribunal to apply a statutory 
  provision rather than an immigration rule where the two are inconsistent.
In this case we are, however, more than content to read paragraph 180B as 
  suggested to us. This means reading sub-paragraph c. as referring only to a 
  "third country" and to the principle~in respect of such a country set out in 
  paragraph 180K. It would therefore be highly desirable if the rules were 
  amended so that sub-paragraph c. simply referred to paragraph 180K and read to 
  the effect that
"there is no safe country to which he could be sent within the meaning of 
  paragraph 180K".
The task for Mr. Chiver is to establish that he is a refugee. As we have 
  held, he may do this by showing (according to the criteria set out in 
  Sivakomaran) that he fears that he would be prohibited from obtaining 
  employment and that there is a reasonable likelihood that this would occur. 
  His case therefore turns on the credibility of his evidence.
The Tribunal's appellate role in regard to evidential matters
The Tribunal will interefere with an adjudicator's decision based 
  essentially on assessment of a witness which the adjudicator has seen and the 
  Tribunal has not, only in exceptional cases. In the words of the Court of 
  Appeal
"an appeal Tribunal would be extremely sparing in reviewing an 
  adjudicator's decision as to the credibility of a witness or witnesses whom 
  the adjudicator had seen or heard giving oral evidence and the Tribunal had 
  not" (see Alam Bi v. IAT [1979-1980] Imm AR 146 at p.151).
The adjudicator's approach - is the determination flawed?
In our view the concluding paragraph of the determination illustrates that 
  the adjudicator did bear in mind when reaching his conclusion the various 
  discrepancies to which he had earlier referred. As Mr. Kulscar said, the 
  critical sentence is probably that in which the adjudicator expresses the view 
  that none of the discrepancies, or indeed Mr. Chiver's disclaimers, made in 
  respect of an earlier entry "can destroy the general line of the story" In 
  that sentence the adjudicator is finding that although there may have been 
  embellishments and there remain uncertainties, he is satisfied first, that the 
  series of events starting with the refusal to participate in putting down the 
  demonstrators has been shown to have occurred and secondly, that because of 
  those events there would be a reasonable likelihood of persecution in the 
  sense of prohibition of employment. That is a finding based on the view taken 
  by the adjudicator of Mr. Chiver.
Mr. Gammons focused on the paragraph in which the adjudicator said that the 
  difference in accounts by Mr. Chiver as to the reason for the failure to 
  secure the return of his job "must require some explanation". That 
  explanation, said Mr. Gammons, did not appear to have been given and the 
  matter was left in the air. Mr. Kulscar argued that the adjudicator was simply 
  commenting on the fact that there was no explanation for the difference in the 
  accounts and that this was a matter adverse to Mr. Chiver which must be 
  balanced as part of the concluding exercise. Further, said Mr. Kulscar, as the 
  adjudicator had said the general story was consistent in that it was the lack 
  of the work card which caused the prohibition of employment.
There are indeed inconsistencies but they are not inconsistencies which the 
  adjudicator ignored. We agree with Mr. Kulscar that the structure of the 
  determination reflects the adjudicator's approach in listing matters adverse 
  to Mr. Chiver and then concluding that these do not affect the adjudicator's 
  belief in the kernel of Mr. Chiver's story. It cannot be said that this 
  approach is so inherently illogical as to render the determination flawed. In 
  effect it adopts precisely the approach which is urged upon adjudicators, i.e. 
  to weigh up the evidence and to indicate that which is believed and that which 
  is not.
It is only when an adjudicator after stating that evidence is believed or 
  disbelieved reaches a conclusion which has no foundation in the belief or 
  disbelief that a determination cannot stand because of inherent 
  inconsistencies. In this case this is patently not so for the adjudicator's 
  findings on credibility adverse to Mr. Chiver go as the adjudicator said to 
  the details of the story. It is perfectly possible for an adjudicator to 
  believe that a witness is not telling the truth about some matters, has 
  exaggerated the story to make his case better, or is simply uncertain about 
  matters, but still to be persuaded that the centre piece of the story stands. 
  This is particularly so where the critical criterion for an adjudicator is the 
  reasonable likelihood of persecution occurring were a person to return to a 
  particular country.
The appeal is dismissed.
BAILII:
Copyright Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
Privacy Policy
|
Feedback
|
Donate to BAILII
URL:
http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKIAT/1994/10758.html