us-west-2
Here are some examples of asylum seekers fearing persecution if deported, with relevant quotes from the legal cases provided:

1. AD (Return, Garde a Vu) Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT 03392
This Algerian appellant feared being detained and mistreated upon return as a failed asylum seeker. The Tribunal stated:

"Professor Seddon expressed the view that failed asylum seekers were highly likely on their return to Algeria to be detained by the Immigration and Security Services for further questioning as to the reasons for being abroad and for having sought asylum."

2. MT v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 03404  
This appellant, an ethnic Armenian from Azerbaijan, feared persecution based on his ethnicity upon return. The Tribunal found:

"The Tribunal are satisfied on the basis of the evidence we have heard in this appeal that there is a real risk that the appellant would be the victim of hostility, violence and discrimination to such an extent that it could properly be described as persecution."

3. RS (failed asylum seekers) Syria [2004] UKIAT 00257
While dismissing this Syrian appellant's claim, the Tribunal acknowledged: 

"The [Amnesty International] report draws attention to the fact that seeking political asylum abroad is perceived to be the act of government opponents by the Syrian authorities and that the very fact of leaving the country to seek asylum abroad is imputed to be a manifestation of opposition to the Syrian government."

4. MA (risk from any political activity) Libya [2004] UKIAT 00252
This Libyan appellant claimed he would be at risk as a failed asylum seeker. The Tribunal accepted expert evidence that "applying for asylum is generally considered as a betrayal of Qadhafi's revolutionary system and anyone doing so is looked upon unfavourably by the regime."

In summary, these cases highlight fears of detention, interrogation, discrimination, violence and general disfavor by authorities against failed asylum seekers upon their return.
